Okay, good morning.
I can see everybody can hear me.
Thanks for coming to this session.
This is on developing
QuickTime components.
I'm Gary Woodcock from Discrete.
And what we're going to cover today
are concepts that are common to writing
all types of QuickTime components.
So we're not actually going to focus on
the details of any particular component,
like an image compressor
or a movie exporter,
but we'll go over the basics of
things that you'll have to do for
any type of component that you write.
And hopefully what you'll
take away from this session is
how to leverage QuickTime to
deploy your own technologies.
For example,
let's say you have come up with the
world's best compression algorithm.
We'd all love to see that in QuickTime,
and there's mechanisms where you
can make that technology available,
and those mechanisms are components.
QuickTime is the most flexible
and open media architecture
that's out there on any platform.
We as developers have a really
unprecedented ability to customize
QuickTime to do new and different things.
Okay, you can also use components
as an extensibility
mechanism for your software.
This would be a type of thing
where if you didn't want to-- well,
if you wanted to encapsulate
functionality in your
application in a modular way,
components are a way
that you can do that.
So you could actually have--
use components as plug-ins,
for example.
So you might have a spelling checker
component or a grammar component
for a word processing application.
You could actually
bundle them up this way.
Okay, you should be familiar with C,
the memory manager, the resource manager,
and of course, the component manager.
We'll go through a brief review of the
component manager a little later today.
Okay, so we're going to cover
what is a component,
why should I write one,
how do I write and debug a component,
How do I create my own kind of component?
And then how do I deliver it?
How do I get it to a
customer or an end user?
Basically, a component is just another
type of code library.
We've probably all
written static libraries,
shared libraries of various types.
A component is really, at its heart,
just another type of code library.
It can be used by multiple clients,
so it has the concept of reusability.
It can be private or public,
so there's a notion of scoping.
And it can be versioned.
and you might say to yourself, "Well,
gee, that's not really all that
unique," but components have a
very interesting feature in that
they can be searched by capability
as opposed to a name or a symbol.
Basically, you can say,
"I need this type of functionality,"
and there's various levels of
granularity that you can request this,
but you might say,
"I need to get access to a JPEG codec
or a decompressor." You can actually
ask for that type of functionality
without really caring who implements it,
what its name is,
what the symbol tables look like,
and all the usual things that you
have to deal with with typical
DLL or shared library mechanisms.
You can also use components to directly
extend the capabilities of QuickTime.
In other words, we as developers,
we can make QuickTime do things
that it didn't do out of the box.
And then, of course, you can deliver your
components on Windows.
You can deliver it on Mac OS 9, Mac OS X.
And it's largely the same
code in all those places.
Okay, so what else can they do?
Components have a notion of being
able to inherit functionality.
Basically, you can capture other
kinds of components.
You can delegate functions to base
components to help you do your work
when you're writing a component.
An example of this would be
the base image decompressor,
where Apple's made it very easy
to write your own decompressor by
handing off a lot of the maintenance
and housekeeping functions to a base
component that will do that for you.
So you can concentrate on just
writing the differentiating code
for your image decompressor.
Components can also
expose user interface.
Probably some of the most popular
or most prominent examples of that
would be the movie controller is a
component that exposes interface.
The standard compression
dialog is another component
that has user interface.
Okay, you can use -- your component can
use other components to create a
fairly complex chain of functionality.
Think of something like
the sequence grabber,
which makes it fairly easy for
an application to put video
acquisition into their application.
It's a component that actually uses,
you know,
Half a dozen or more different components
to get that functionality into your app.
And you don't actually know about it,
because you have a very simple
API that you're using at the top level.
But these things can be chained together
to do some really amazing things.
Okay, so real quickly,
let's compare components to
other types of libraries.
So this is just a quick table.
You can see search by name.
Generally speaking,
everybody can do that.
Components are unique in that
they can search by capability,
and we'll talk about this in a
little bit more detail in a moment.
Dynamically loaded?
Sort of.
Windows and OS X have this ability.
OS 9 components do not.
You can use a variety of
languages to write components.
I actually haven't tried to
write a component in Objective-C.
If any of you ever try that,
I'd love to hear the results of that.
But pretty much any type of language
you can use to write a component.
And then, of course,
as we mentioned earlier,
they're supported on a wide
variety of operating systems.
Basically, anywhere QuickTime runs,
you could potentially
deliver your component.
Okay, some popular components.
These are just things that
developers often write.
Image codecs,
movie importers and exporters,
graphics importers, exporters,
video digitizers, media handlers.
These are all examples of components
that third-party developers have
written to extend QuickTime.
And there are many examples of
this in the marketplace today.
At its heart,
a component contains a dispatcher,
which is basically just a mechanism
to route client requests to
a routine in your component.
There are four required
component routines.
We'll go through each of these in detail.
Every component should implement these.
There are some optional component
routines that are defined,
your choice as to whether
you want to implement them.
And then each component type
has a set of interfaces that
are associated with the type.
So, for example,
a video digitizer component has probably
over 100 different routines that
are defined for that component type.
And then, whoops, I'm sorry,
support resources.
These are the component resource,
might be the component resource
map if your component needs
to export public resources.
Again, we'll talk about these in
more detail a little later.
But basically these things,
pretty much any component
will have this as a minimum.
Okay,
real quick component manager review.
So the component manager
basically manages the components
and the connections from
clients to those components.
and it's actually part of Mac OS and on
Windows it's delivered with QuickTime.
Components are always
identified by a type,
a subtype, and a manufacturer.
These are 4CC codes.
Not too much you have
to worry about here.
There's a lot that are
predefined by Apple.
Lowercase types are, as usual,
reserved for Apple,
so as a third-party developer,
you need to use either a mix
of uppercase and lowercase or
something along those lines,
but stay away from the
all lowercase things.
Those are reserved.
Okay, you have to register a
component before you can use it.
There's a variety of mechanisms
that you can do this,
depending on whether you want to
make your component widely available
to all kinds of applications or
whether you want to use it privately,
and we'll talk about
that in a little bit.
We already mentioned that.
Each component has its own unique API.
This is an example of how
you would find a component.
So in this case,
we have a math component type.
This is actually the sample component
that will be in the sample code.
There will be a URL later for
where you can go download that.
But what we're saying here is basically
we want to get a math component.
We don't really care what subtype
or what manufacturer it is.
Just go find the first one that
you can locate and give me its ID.
We could refine this search.
If, for example, there were, you know,
the Super Food Company had a particular
type of math component that had
extremely good precision or something,
we could actually substitute the
4cc for that manufacturer in the
component manufacturer field to say,
I really want to find that component.
In other words,
don't just give me any one.
Give me that particular one.
Opening a component is really easy.
You take the component ID and
you call open a component,
you get a component instance,
which is your connection as a client.
The only thing to point out here,
there's an older call called
open component that does
not return a result code,
so I would encourage everyone to use
this form of the call because it will
actually give you the result code.
You can query a component to see if a
particular selector in its component type
interface is actually supported before
you use it or before you try to call it.
The call component can do,
and it takes your component instance
along with the selector of interest,
and then it returns basically
zero if it's not supported,
and then if it returns anything else,
it's supported.
So you can call this to find out
before you try to call a routine
whether it'll actually work or not.
version,
basically every component has a version.
It returns a long and the high
word of the long is actually
the interface revision.
So if you are writing
your own component API,
you'll define normally a 1 for
your component interface version.
The lower two bytes are actually
the implementation version.
So as you do bug fixes or you bump
the revision of the implementation,
you would actually bump that number.
Okay, you can... Components,
this is what I was referring to a
little earlier about being able to
do some limited form of inheritance.
You can target components,
and what this call is basically
saying is when you would normally
call your component internally
to do a particular function,
if you make this call to a component,
this says, use the target instead.
Don't call yourself.
Call the target.
This allows another component
to be able to override another
component's behavior by forcing
that component to call out to it.
It's actually a really
simple thing to support,
as we'll see later.
Okay,
then closing a component is very simple.
You just close the component instance,
and that's it.
There are some platform
differences I'd like to point out.
On the Mac OS 9 and earlier,
there's a global registration
list for components.
Basically,
there's one big list of components that
all processes and address spaces can see,
and so you can actually see component
instance counts for things that
are not actually in your process.
In OS X and Windows, this isn't true.
You get a local list for each process.
There are some implications to
that we'll talk about in a moment.
Component reference constants.
These are a 32-bit value that can
be stored with the component ID.
The idea here is that that
value can be retrieved by any
instance of that component.
Okay,
and we'll talk about how that's used.
Modification seeds and instance counting,
again, these on OS X and Windows only
work on a per-process basis.
They don't work across all processes.
So I might count two instances of a
JPEG decompressor in one process on OS X,
and in a different process
there may be one instance.
But I don't actually, they don't have any
relationship to one another.
other than their JPEG components.
Okay, this sometimes trips people up.
Carbon components don't
actually run on OS 9.
See, this one crop up every now and then.
If you want to build
a component for OS 9,
you actually still need to
link against interface slide.
And on OS X and Windows,
the register and unregister routines
are actually invoked each time
a new QuickTime process starts.
So if you have a component
that implements these things,
it will actually get called
each time on OS X and Windows.
On OS 9 earlier,
it was really just when the component was
first registered for the entire system.
So there are, again,
implications to that,
and let's talk about those.
Okay,
so you actually want to avoid using the
component refcon to store common instance
data across processes or address spaces.
This doesn't work on OS X and Windows.
What used to happen in
OS X is people would say,
I want to do some,
like a lookup table setup,
and I'd store it in a handle or
a pointer off the refcon with the
idea that any time that component
was opened in any process,
I could actually get that value.
Okay,
that doesn't work on OS X in Windows.
Okay, again,
one of the older usages of register
and unregister was sort of a one-time
setup and teardown type of routine.
As we noted earlier, on OS X and Windows,
these two routines actually
get called each time that
your QuickTime process begins.
So if you really have a
one-time thing you need to do,
this doesn't work.
Also on OS X, you may actually incur
additional application launch
overhead or boot overhead.
For the process, because you actually are
running these things multiple
times instead of just once.
So you want to avoid doing that sort of
thing in register and unregister on OS X.
Okay, and then as we noted earlier,
you really, if you want to limit
connections to your component,
counting instances is probably
not the best way to do that.
If you had some hardware resource,
for example, that you really could only
have one connection to that,
and you were using a component
to wrap the interface,
because you get a different
copy of that component,
or a different registration
of it per process,
you can't actually limit the connections
to your hardware resource this way.
Okay, development tools.
In the sample code that's posted,
what I did is I actually used
Project Builder for OS X,
Code Warrior for the OS 9 and earlier,
and Visual Studio.net
for the Windows code.
There are other environments you can use.
For example, you can use Code Warrior to
build Windows components.
These are just sort of the
prominent environments for
the various operating systems.
Okay, so you're probably saying, okay,
can we really start now?
What are we doing?
Okay, what we're going to do is we're
going to try to define a component
that can actually add two
numbers and give you the result.
Something that would take
you one line of C code,
we're going to stretch out into
a bunch of lines of C code.
But it'll be illustrative of the
process of what you have to do to write
an interface and write a component.
We'll support all the required routines
and most of the optional routines,
and then we're going to see how
calls in the client program translate
to routines in the component.
Okay, so here's our API.
And it's... It looks a little strange,
but there's some similarities to what
you would do if you were defining an
API for any other kind of code library.
In the highlighted portion,
we have basically a return code,
which is the component result.
We have the name of the function,
which is math add.
And then we have an argument list.
And the first argument in any
component call is going to
be the component instance.
This is your connection to the component.
And then the rest of the arguments are
the interesting arguments for the call.
In this case, we have, you know,
the first number, the second number,
and then we return a
result of the addition.
The rest of what's there is...
You'll see that the first line,
the kmath add select,
is actually a selector.
That's a component selector.
Component selectors for things
that... in interfaces you write
or interfaces that you use.
Most cases will be positive.
The base selectors, which are the open,
close version, and can do,
and some of the optional ones,
these are all negative selectors.
So negative selectors are
reserved for use by Apple.
So none of us actually will
get to define any of those.
You'll also see if you
go look in any of the,
like quicktimecomponents.h, for example,
you'll see selector numbers
for the various component
types that are in there.
Thank you.
The rest of this is
basically some macros.
Xtern API is basically a helpful
macro that keeps you from having
to write things like Xtern
Pascal underscore underscore,
DeclSpec, DLL import,
whatever it might be.
If you use this, it will actually,
when you compile,
insert the right stuff for you.
So it's pretty handy.
The component call now is a macro
that really is associating the amount
of space needed by your argument
list for the component manager.
So that's why we see
the size of calls here.
Basically what we're saying
is we need eight bytes of
space for our argument list.
Okay,
there's also some constants that we need.
So we mentioned our type, subtype,
and manufacturer earlier.
So for the sake of this demonstration,
we're going to use math
and WWDC and Apple.
We need a resource ID for our component,
and then we have our interface version
and our implementation version.
So they're both one because
we're creating something new.
Okay,
every component needs instance storage,
or every component instance
needs some storage.
What's listed here is basically
the minimal stuff that almost
every component will need.
The self is the reference that
the component manager assigned
when open component was called.
So we actually get that in our component,
and we can actually use that
to call other routines in our
interface from within our component.
Target, if you recall earlier
our discussion of that,
this is when our component
is targeted externally,
this is the instance that is passed
in and that we store in our component.
This will allow us to where we would
call self or use self to call one
of our internal routines or call
one of our routines internally,
excuse me, we would instead use target
if we had been targeted.
Okay, the dispatcher.
And this causes a lot of issues.
It basically is just responsible
for mapping our selectors to the
routines that we've implemented.
You can write it yourself,
and you can go through the pain
of dealing with mixed-mode logic
and routine descriptors and all
sorts of other gnarly stuff,
or you can use the component
dispatch helper.c file,
which I strongly recommend everyone use,
and it will handle all
of that stuff for you.
It's not very hard to use.
We'll go through it in detail here.
Again, do use that.
If you really want to see what it does,
you can preprocess the file,
your component file,
and dump out the C code and look at
what the dispatcher does for you.
And then maybe that might convince
you that you don't actually want
to hand code all that stuff.
Okay, so the dispatch helper is
part of the QuickTime SDK.
And what we're going to do is we're
going to write a dispatch header file
and go through all the defines that
you actually need to create to make
it generate the right thing for you.
Okay, so we have a dispatch header file,
and the first part of it looks like this.
We'll go through each line here.
So the first line,
we have a component selector offset.
This is basically the number
of base selectors that we're
specifying in our component.
This number I put 10 here,
that's actually the total number
of base selectors that are defined
by the component manager today.
It's a contiguous number
of base selectors.
It's not the total possible number.
If you put 10, in your dispatch file,
you'll need to have 10 entries.
We'll go through that in a moment.
Then we have the number of selector
ranges that we're going to define.
A selector range is really,
every component has a range of selectors
for the component manager calls,
open, close, can-do, version.
And then presumably for it to be useful,
there's at least one range
for the component type.
So we have one range.
We're going to use our math component
interface that we're defining.
Again,
it's a contiguous range of selectors,
and there are two other defines
that help the component dispatch
helper understand how to interpret
some of the range information.
The first is a range shift.
A lot of folks get hung up on this one.
It's basically the amount that a
selector value is shifted left and then
incremented to produce its range number.
I have an example listed here.
If we had a selector value,
if our math add select value was, say,
0101, if we shifted left by 8,
we'd get 1, and then we would actually
say we'd add 1 to that,
and it would actually be in range 2.
In our particular case,
when we define our selector as 0,
we shift that left, we get 0, we add 1,
it's in component range 1.
So that's all it is.
It's just a shift in the increment to
get the range that your selectors are in.
Okay,
so that tells us how to find the range.
We also need to be able to find what
entry we're talking about within a range,
and the range mask helps us do that.
So we can actually use this value
to mask against the selector
to get the particular entry
in a given component range.
So if we use the 01-01 example again,
that would actually
map to routine entry 1.
Okay, so we'd mask off that first 01.
We'd be left with 01.
That's our entry.
Okay,
so that's really all there is to that.
We have a storage type
that we need to define.
If you recall back,
we talked about each component
instance needs storage.
That can be a pointer.
It can be a handle.
This is just declaring what
kind of a thing that it is.
Generally speaking,
unless you've just got a really
huge set of component information,
you need to keep track of
it on an instance basis.
Most of the time I just
use pointer for this.
Okay, so here's our,
this was our range zero, if you will.
These are our base selectors that
the component manager defines.
So what we see here is we're
going to support basically
the first six selectors,
open, close, can do, version, register,
target, did I say six?
It's actually seven, and unregister.
For those components or those selectors,
we're not going to write a routine for,
we'll define component error for.
It just tells the dispatcher that
return an error code for that if
anybody tries to call it because
we don't actually implement it.
Okay, and again, these selectors,
the order is actually significant here.
So this actually,
get public resource has a value of
minus 10 for its selector value.
Open has a minus 1, so it's significant,
the order of declaration here.
And again,
negative selectors are reserved by Apple.
Okay, so here's our range.
We have one selector, and it's math add.
And it's just that simple.
We have a component call that says,
again, it's just another macro.
And then we have a
component call that says,
again, it's just another macro.
There are some other
ones you can use here.
We aren't going to
have it in our example,
but other things that you can
have are component delegate.
If you have a component that
your component opens that you
want to pass calls off to,
you can actually tell the dispatcher to
call that component instead of calling
your component for a particular selector.
Okay, there's a bunch of defines that
the component dispatch helper
actually needs to do its job.
And we'll go through these.
So this define is really just
the prefix of our component-- the
names of our component routines.
In this case, I've used __math.
So if you looked in-- when
you look in the sample code,
you'll actually see a routine
in the body of the component
that's called __mathopen.
So all that's happening here is
the dispatch helper's using this
to catenate to the base selector
names and our API selector names.
This is just telling the dispatcher
what kind of storage we have.
Our storage type is actually
MathGlobal's pointer.
We define this value so that the
dispatcher knows that's the kind of
data type we use for our storage.
And then we have a prefix
for any of the universal proc
pointer information that we need,
which in this case is UPP math.
If you look in some, again,
in some of the
QuickTime component headers,
you'll see the same type of stuff for
all the components basically have a UPP,
VD, you know, get max source rack,
for example, for a video digitizer.
So this is just the prefix that's used.
And then we tell it where to
actually find the dispatch file.
This is basically the stuff that says,
"Here's the component ranges.
Here are the entries that we're
actually supporting in our component."
And then we have an API-unique set
of defines for our math interface,
the base name and the globals.
In most cases,
it's safe to just use the same stuff
that you defined for the component
base and the component globals.
There's really not much need
to make those different.
Okay, so finally we get to the point
where we can start to include
all of this into our .c file,
and this is the order in which we
would actually do the includes,
and it too is significant.
You want to pull things in.
The base components select this k.h file,
our math selectors, k.h,
and then the dispatch helper.
So all the stuff that the dispatch
helper actually needs to generate the
dispatcher has to be included first.
You're probably asking,
what is this k.h file?
file.
And these are some of the utility macros
that are actually needed by the helper.
And rather than go through
this in exhaustive detail,
and I have a hard time remembering
this myself from instance to instance
of work that I do with components,
you could actually just treat
this more or less as a template.
And if you need to write
your own interface,
you can take this and basically change
math to whatever your needs are.
And it's basically stuff that
here's how you catenate things,
here are the storage types, the prefixes,
things of that nature.
It just helps the component
manager understand how it can put
together all these defines and
build out the dispatcher names.
Okay, and then we also have another
expression of our prototype.
It looks similar to what we
defined in the selectors.h,
but it's expressed with some
of the defines that we use,
like the math globals,
add math base name,
which is that underscore,
underscore math thing we talked about.
So it's really just the same expression
of the API in a slightly different way.
Okay, and then we have this
UPP proc info constant.
And actually, if you look at this in
the QuickTime headers,
you'll actually see these usually
expressed as some hex number.
And basically what you see here is
a bunch of macros and defines that
will actually generate a similar hex
number if you actually preprocess this.
You'd get some 32-bit long hex number.
Again, it's about telling the component
manager how much space that you
need for your return values and
for your arguments in your routine.
And that's really what this is about.
Okay, let's look at how each of the
routines are actually implemented.
So this is the open routine.
Again,
these are intended to show the minimum
things that a component would need to do.
You open a component,
and the first thing that you actually
need to do is allocate some storage
for your component instance state.
That's the new pointer call there.
Then we actually tell the
component manager to associate
that storage with our instance.
That's what the set component
instance storage is about.
And then you see a line there that
is global self equals global target.
This is just so that anywhere
where we might call one of
our API routines internally,
we'll just always use target.
So we don't have to actually keep
track of whether it's self or target.
We'll just always use that,
and we'll initialize it to be self,
so that we're always calling
internally to start with.
Okay,
and the close routine is pretty simple.
The biggest thing to remember
here is just be sure to clean
up everything that you're using.
So for this particular example,
it's very simple.
We just need to dispose
of our instance storage.
But if you had other types of data
that you had in handles or pointers,
you need to clean that up here.
This might be a good place
to close down connections to
hardware if you needed to do that.
Basically,
put the system back to where it was,
where you found it when
you actually opened,
as much as possible.
Okay, the version routine, again,
very simple.
It's just return your
version information.
So those are those constants that we
defined as our implementation is one
and our interface version is one.
So that's a very simple
routine to implement.
Okay, then we have the can-do routine.
I actually put this slide
together before I knew there
was actually Jamba Juice here.
But in any event,
you don't actually have to write this if
you use the component dispatch helper.
It will write this routine for you.
So you get it for free if you use
the component dispatch helper.
Okay, register routine.
Now, this routine is optional.
You don't have to implement it.
It can be used to check to see what
kind of environment you're dealing in.
In this example, what I did was say,
all right,
let's go make sure that a particular
version of QuickTime is actually
present before I allow this
component to be registered for use.
So what happens here is
if QuickTime 4.1.2 isn't,
or later, isn't installed,
we actually won't
register this component,
and it won't be available for use.
So things you might do here are
if you required a particular
operating system service or a
particular feature of QuickTime,
that sort of thing,
you might check for that here,
and then not allow the
component to be used.
If you do use this routine,
you do need to set the component
wants registered message flag
in your component resource,
and we'll look at that a little later.
Okay, the target routine.
Again, this is fairly simple.
If you recall earlier in the open,
we set the target field
to be pointing to self.
And here what happens is we
simply update that value with what
gets passed into this routine.
So we update target to be target,
and then we continue to use it the
way we were using it all along.
And then if it gets set to null,
we'll just reset back to target.
himself.
Okay, unregister.
Again, this is another optional routine.
You don't have to support it.
I actually couldn't think of
a really good example here.
It's not used all that often.
But if there was some particular cleanup
that you needed to do in general for your
component that you couldn't do in Close,
this is kind of your last
opportunity to do that cleanup.
And if you want to use this routine,
again, there's another flag.
There's a flag in the resource,
in your component resource called
component wants unregister.
And it's actually in the
component register flags field.
And you have to set that
flag or this routine won't be
The component manager has this
notion of public resources.
So components can have
public and private resources.
And private resources are
really those things that you
want to use in your component,
but you don't really
want anybody else to use.
Public resources are those things that
your component may use internally,
but you would actually want,
or you would want to provide
the ability for other clients
of your component to use.
You do this by means of a THNR resource,
a component resource map,
and it associates your private component
type and ID with a public type and ID.
Places where you see this
in QuickTime today are,
for example, for MIME types.
You might see this kind of a mapping.
A client gets access to these resources
by calling getComponentPublicResource.
And you don't actually have to
implement get public resource in
your component for this to work.
You only really need to have
the component map resource.
If you have resources that are actually
dynamically created on the fly,
like you can't actually
compile them into a .r file,
you may actually need to implement
this routine in your component.
But if it's just sort of a straight
mapping from static resources,
you don't actually have
to implement this routine.
Okay, finally, after all that,
we're to the point where
we can add two numbers.
So, this is our math add routine.
Pretty simple.
We just check to make
sure we got good values,
we add the numbers,
we return it back out.
We have a component now, and you think,
can I actually start to
use it from a client?
Well, not quite yet.
We actually need to write some glue to
allow clients to call your component.
The glue basically facilitates the
handoff from the client to the component
manager and then to the component.
It is possible to hard link
this into an application.
This usually ends up as a shared library,
for example,
on Mac OS 9 or a framework on OS X.
You can, again,
make this private if you want to so
that only your client can see it.
We're going to create a stub library
that our component and any of our
clients can actually link against.
And there's gonna be some glue helper
routines that are defined here.
And I'm gonna go through
this kind of quickly,
'cause it's fairly, uh, gnarly.
But again, you can use a lot of this.
A lot of this is kind of boilerplate,
and a lot of it is really-- the
stuff that isn't boilerplate
is really wrapped around,
again, communicating how much space
your component needs for its
result codes and argument list.
So you can think of this as kind
of another way to express that.
So this is the helper
for a call mac component,
and you'll notice there's, again,
the information here about the result
size and the stack routine information.
on Windows it's a little messier.
You have to actually manually fill
out a component parameter structure,
and that requires you to do a little
finagling with how many parameters
you actually have so that you can
fill out that structure correctly.
In this case, for our Math.Add routine we
actually have three parameters.
So you can see that we
have--there's a params array at
the bottom if you can see that.
So we have three of those.
If this only had one parameter,
we'd actually have a structure
that only had the param zero.
Fortunately, most of the time you're
not writing your own API,
so you don't have to go through all this.
For any of the existing component types,
this is all handled for you already.
Okay, and then there's yet another
expression of our API and how to,
what to do when this API is encountered.
So this is, again,
calling through our helper routines.
And again, it's very gnarly,
but the thing to bear in mind is we're
basically building up this component
parameter structure so the component
manager gets the data in the form it
needs before it passes the data line.
And that's what all that is about.
All of that stuff is in the sample code,
so there is a working
example for Windows,
Mac OS X, Mac OS 9, it's all there,
so you can see frameworks
and shared libraries,
figure out how to do this glue.
It is all there for you.
On Windows,
there's another thing that you need to
do before you can get rolling with this.
A component on Windows is
basically a DLL,
so you need a main entry point.
This doesn't actually do anything.
It needs to be there to define
how we get into the component,
but as you can see, it just returns true.
It doesn't actually do anything
on the switch statement.
You also need to export the name
of your component dispatcher.
That's usually done with
a module definition file.
Again, this is Windows-only stuff.
Okay, let's take a quick look at some
of the component resource stuff.
People get kind of hung up on this one,
too,
and usually it is either an issue with
flags or in the way that you're defining
your code type or your platform type.
So the things I actually
have highlighted here,
you'll see why in just a moment.
We have our component type,
component subtype,
component manufacturer.
We have some flags information.
The STRN that you see there is
just a component name resource.
We'll show that in a minute.
Then there's an info resource.
We don't have an icon.
That's why after the STRI stuff,
there's two zeros that
would normally be for icons.
We have a variety of flags here.
We actually support unregister,
so you'll notice that's actually set.
The component has multiple platforms
flag is a little bit misleading because
in this particular example with PowerPC,
we only actually have one
platform we're building,
but you still need that flag set.
It basically lets you see the
component extension and define that.
So in most cases, you'll have that set.
We have the component wants
register message set because
we actually implemented that.
Underscore PPC is just our
code resource type on PowerPC,
and then we indicate our
platform there as well.
well.
You'll notice at the very bottom we
say we have a component resource map.
That's the THNR.
So what's different between
this and a Carbon CFM?
Very little.
We now have a code fragment resource
that is referring to our code,
and we changed the platform type.
Okay, how about MachO?
Again, very little different.
We have a DLLE entry
for our code resource,
and we still have a
PowerPC native entry point.
Lastly, Windows.
Very similar.
We have the DLLE,
but we have a platform Win32.
So all the rest of that stuff stayed
the same for the component resource.
But those are the things that make it,
that people get a little hung up on,
so I wanted to point out that, you know,
largely these things can stay
very similar across platforms.
Okay, the code fragment resource,
if you're building that
type of a component,
a couple things I wanted
to point out here.
It's a standard code fragment resource,
but you'll notice in the highlight
portion we have the CPNT,
which indicates it's a component,
and then there's this
weird hex value there.
That actually turns out to simply
be our component resource ID,
so it's 128,
just expressed as a hex number.
Okay,
for our Windows and our Mac OS stuff,
we have a DLL e-resource,
and this is where we
define the dispatcher name.
Pay careful attention to this,
because this is often something
that trips people up when they
try to register their components
for the first time and use them.
If there are differences, for example,
on the Windows side between the name
that you exported and what you have here,
it won't work.
You need to make sure that those
names are actually the same,
that they line up.
Okay, the string name and string info
resources are pretty self-explanatory.
So when somebody calls get
component info on your component,
this is the name and the info handles
that will be returned back to the client.
You can pretty much put
whatever you want here.
Try to put something explanatory
of what your component does.
Okay, here's our component resource map.
And all we really did here,
just again for the
purposes of an example,
is we have our string name resource,
and I just mapped it out to be a
public resource of type STR with ID 1.
So if you actually called get public
resource with type STR and ID 1,
you would actually get our
component string name resource.
One thing to notice that I forgot to
mention earlier about public resources,
they're called resources,
they're not actually
resource manager handles.
They're handles.
So you don't want to call
release resource on them,
you want to call dispose handle
when you get rid of them.
Okay,
on Windows we have these interesting
tools called res and reswac that you need
to run to get your resource information
attached to your QuickTime component.
And res is,
if any of you are familiar with the old
MPW tools for doing resource compilation,
this is very similar,
except it's a DOS console app
that compiles QuickTime .r
files into .qtr files.
Okay,
so it's just sort of a Windows-compatible
form of the resource for it.
And then there's another utility
called ResWack that you use to
actually combine the QTR file
into your Windows component DLL.
Okay,
and ordinarily these things you can set
up as just a post-build batch execution.
Once you're done compiling on Windows,
you can just run a batch file
that takes care of this for you.
An example of this is in the sample code.
Okay, registering components.
There's three ways we can do this.
You can do auto-registration,
which basically means I'm just going to
let the system take care of this for me,
register my component for me.
So you leave it up to basically
the component manager to decide
when to register your component.
Typically that will be when the
QuickTime process on OS X starts up.
Your component will get picked
up by the component manager,
and then you can register your component.
You can also get a component picked up in
the local registration for that process.
There's also an application called
Reinstaller 3 that's useful if any
of you are doing Mac OS 9 or earlier
type of testing or development.
This actually lets you
register a component without
actually having to reboot,
which is the normal way that you
would get a component in on OS 9.
And the last way is a
programmatic registration.
So the auto registration
basically you just have to put
the components in the right place.
On OS 9, that's in the
QuickTime extensions folder,
in extensions, inside system folder,
and then you reboot.
On OS X,
you put this into library QuickTime or
user's username library QuickTime.
You don't have to reboot.
On Windows, you put this in your
System32 QuickTime directory.
On older versions of Windows, prior to,
say, Windows 2K,
it might actually be System QuickTime,
for example,
on Windows 98 or something like that.
And we did,
we just talked about Reinstaller 3.
This is the URL where you
can actually get this utility
if you want to download it.
You can also get to this just off
the main QuickTime developer pages.
Okay, programmatic registration.
So register component basically,
basically
If you have the description of the
component and its main entry point,
you can use this routine to register
the component local to your application.
The other way you can do it is if
you've got the component resource,
you can call register component resource,
and this will do a similar thing.
So you're probably wondering, though,
why this would be interesting.
So the first thing is you actually
don't want other clients to
see your component or use it.
Why would you ever want to do that?
Well,
if you were in the Wednesday sessions,
Tom Dowdy actually mentioned
something about how you could use,
if you had a proprietary file format,
for example, in your application,
and maybe you used a lot of
the other file formats that
QuickTime already supports,
you could actually have a more consistent
user experience if you implemented
your file format as an exporter,
and then you could leverage
all the QuickTime UI,
make it a very seamless experience,
no matter whether people were exporting
to your file format or to other
formats that QuickTime supported.
It would all look very much the same.
So you get some leverage
out of the UI by doing that.
You may also want to just...
It's an interesting way to do
some source-level debugging.
You can just link it in directly with
your app and debug through it that way.
Okay, debugging components.
Source level debugging is available
in all major development environments.
This didn't actually used to
be the case some years ago.
It was kind of a pain to
actually debug components.
But in Project Builder,
in Visual Studio.net, in Code Warrior,
all these environments,
you can actually do
source level debugging.
Okay, if you're still doing some 9x work,
you have the thing, dcommand,
for a max bug,
and this will actually show
you a full printout of all the
components that are in your system,
how many instances are open,
what their refcon values are,
all sorts of interesting information.
So it's pretty helpful on that platform.
And there's some stuff
you can do on Windows.
There's, you know, first of all,
one of the things you may want to do is
make sure that your QuickTime resources
actually got into your component DLL,
and you can use the Visual Studio editor
if you want to just open up and
look and see if it got attached,
or you can use a tool called
ResDet to see whether the
component was attached properly.
Okay, as usual, debug string,
output debug string are your friends.
You want to use them liberally.
and you can find out whether your
routines are actually being called,
in what order, that sort of thing.
So they all work great.
One quick thing I want to talk about is,
okay, now I've got a component,
how do I get it to an end user?
You can ship it yourself.
So if you have,
as we were talking earlier,
you've got an application,
and in the case certainly where if
you don't want other people to use it,
you just ship it with your app,
or even if you do want
other people to use it,
you can ship it that way.
Apple actually provides
another mechanism,
which is the QuickTime Component
Download Program.
This is very interesting if
you're doing an exporter,
an importer, a codec.
There are a number of third parties
today that have codecs that you can
get in exporters through this program.
So if you're doing
that type of component,
I'd encourage you to
contact Apple about that.
Okay.
The rest of the time here I really want
to spend going through common problems
that people have developing components.
Okay, so this is common.
My component compiles and links,
never shows up, it's never registered,
my clients can't see it.
Okay, so the first obvious thing to do
here is you want to make sure that
your register routine isn't failing.
In other words, that it's not returning
that it can't register.
That's an obvious thing to check.
If you're auto-registering,
make sure you put the component
in the right directory.
This is something we talked
about a little earlier.
You want to make sure
that your DLLE resource on
Mac OS X and Windows is defined,
and that it's actually lining up,
that you have the same
names in both places.
And then for Carbon,
you want to make sure that you
have a code fragment resource.
So if these are messed up at all,
chances are really good your component
is not going to do anything for you.
Okay,
and then this was the earlier statement
about making sure you don't have
a mismatch in spelling or whatever
between your dispatcher name and
the name you're actually exporting.
okay, my custom components routine has
wacky values in its arguments
and it sometimes crashes,
locks up, does other nonsocial
or unsociable behavior.
If you're doing your own API,
you want to make sure that you've
actually declared all that stuff we
talked about a little earlier about
making sure we had the return values
and the stack arguments -- I mean,
the routine arguments all defined
correctly in terms of sizes.
If you do that wrong,
this can be the kind of
behavior that you see.
So it might be the kind of a thing where
you said you needed two bytes for an
argument and you actually need four.
So you can get a stack misalignment.
Okay, my component's register
routine never gets called.
So the component looks
like it's coming up,
and I can see it,
but the register routine
never gets called.
You want to make sure that that
component wants register message
flag is set in the component entry,
platform entry of your
component resource.
And there's actually another
place where this can be set,
and it's in the 68K flags field at the
beginning of the component resource.
I
Don't think there's too many people
doing 68k component development.
So for all intents and purposes,
that's an obsolete field.
So you need to make sure
that you not only define it,
you need to put it in the right place.
Okay, and then if you're actually doing
the thing we described earlier where
you're calling register component
or register component resource,
you'll actually need to manually
call your register routine.
So if you're doing this from
within your application code
to register your component,
it won't actually call register for you.
You need to do that yourself.
There is a call in the component
manager in components.h,
call component register,
that you can use to do this.
Okay,
my components routine never gets called.
Not just register,
but nothing gets called.
This is usually,
you want to make sure that you've
accounted for and lined up your
selectors in your dispatch file.
So,
This can be an error in how
you've defined your range
shift mask or your range mask.
It could be an error in how you've
defined the values for your selectors.
So you need to just basically go through
that and make sure what they should be.
Go through that with a fine-tooth comb,
and that usually solves
a lot of these problems.
Topics include components versus
other shared code mechanisms,
anatomy of a basic component,
the component dispatch helper,
cross-platform considerations,
debugging techniques,
and common pitfalls.
Topics include components versus
other shared code mechanisms,
anatomy of a basic component,
the component dispatch helper,
cross-platform considerations,
debugging techniques,
and common pitfalls.
okay, my component opens another one
of my components and needs to
share internal state with it.
Okay, if you recall earlier,
we were talking about how you can't
actually use component ref cons anymore
to do this kind of thing reliably,
which is a way that some components
in the past on OS 9 used to do this.
What you can do is,
with the material that
we've gone over today,
we showed you how to write
a new component type.
That same mechanism can be used to
extend an existing component interface.
Okay, so let's say I was writing
an image decompressor,
and it was actually a hardware resource
that was running on a board that
maybe also does video acquisition.
I'm probably creating
an unusual example here.
So you have two components
that are trying to share
the same hardware resource.
You'd actually like them to be able
to find out whether one or the other
of them has control of the hardware.
You could potentially do that by
extending either the image decompressor
API with a private selector or the
VDig API with a private selector
that can allow those two components
to communicate with each other.
And you would use the same
techniques that you use for
defining a new component type API.
Okay, so speaking of hardware resources,
this one comes up a lot too.
I need to connect to a hardware
resource for my component,
and the hardware only supports a single
connection to the physical device.
And to make matters worse,
I could maybe have multiple
physical devices present.
How should my component handle this?
So I want a component to be the
wrapper around this hardware resource.
That's a good one.
This is a difficult problem to solve.
And some approaches,
you could register your
component once for each physical
device that's in the system.
And you could say, okay,
for each of those components,
I'm only going to allow one instance.
Okay, there's some drawbacks to that.
First of all,
it assumes that you can actually
uniquely and persistently identify
these devices that are in the system.
Maybe that's not always the case.
And that it's possible that
you can track device connection
status across address spaces.
Okay, another approach you might use is,
I register my component once,
allow multiple instances of the component
up to the number of devices that
I actually have installed in the system.
There are some of the
same qualifications here,
and it makes it a little
more difficult to count the
devices that are in the system,
because from the component manager level,
what I would have to do is actually
keep opening the component to figure out
how many of these devices were there.
I could register the component once,
and then I just don't have
any limitations at all.
In other words,
I implement some type of elaborate
mechanism to share a single hardware
connection amongst all these instances.
The obvious thing that happens here
is the more instances they get open,
my performance very likely
goes down because I'm having
to manage between these things.
There's not really a good answer here,
and a lot of this you actually want
to push down to the driver level for
your hardware device so it can actually
tell your component information.
The general thing here is you
probably want to not try to do
all of this sort of stuff in your
component because it's very difficult.
You actually want to try to
push it to a lower level.
Now that said, if any of you were in the
video-intensive application session,
Sean Williams, he showed some stuff
with the IIDC cameras.
Basically what was cool there is
there's a class of devices for which
Apple's providing support where you
actually can have these devices with
unique IDs on your FireWire bus,
and it can persist state
between hot plug and unplug.
There's a lot of progress being
made in this area to help people
with this problem with components.
So I don't know if there's
any other questions.
I would encourage you to,
if you didn't get to see that session,
then at least when the DVDs
of the conference come out,
you may want to go look at that session.
There was some very interesting
stuff talked about there.
Okay, so as we noted,
there's not really a
magic bullet on this one.
You'll have to experiment to see
what actually works best for you,
but again,
you probably want to push a lot
of this connection management
stuff out of the component down
to a lower level in your software.
Okay,
just some closing advice to summarize
some of the things from the session.
You don't want to allow multiple
instances of your component if
you can't actually support it.
You need to make sure you clean up
properly when your component's closed.
I encourage you to use Gestalt
to find out if the services you
need are actually there before
your component is registered,
before you allow clients to use it.
Use the component dispatch helper.
Having done this for
many years for both ways,
this is hugely useful.
And like I say,
if you need to convince yourself,
take the sample code that's available
and preprocess the C file and look
at what the dispatcher does for you.
It does a lot of work for you.
Don't forget that the component
manager has platform differences if
you're actually trying to develop
for systems beyond Mac OS X.
Okay, before you actually go through the
exercise of writing your own API,
we saw that it's fairly involved to do,
you should probably go through
the QuickTime APIs first.
It has a lot of different APIs,
and perhaps you can get by with,
if you can get by with using them,
the ones that are there, that's great,
or maybe you can actually use one that's
close and extend it to get what you need.
Okay,
there's a QuickTime API mailing list.
I encourage everyone to subscribe to
that if you're doing component work.
There's a lot of developers there that
have a lot of helpful hints and tips.
And this is the roadmap for today.
And one thing I want to get to is,
let's see, so we have MPEG-4 today.
The sample code for this
session is at that URL.
There's actually both Mac and
Windows files there for you to download.
It illustrates everything we
talked about in the session today.
So you can go get that and try it out.
Please feel free to contact
me at garywoodcock.com.
After this session, we can talk outside,
or you can also email me.
That's our session for today,
and I'd like to thank
everybody very much for coming.